---
title: "Mathematical models on the impact of noise and dyadic molecular structures on the properties of a cardiac myocyte"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2008-05-05-phd
excerpt: 'PhD Thesis'
date: 2008-05-15
venue: 'University of Helsinki'
paperurl: 'https://helda.helsinki.fi/bitstream/handle/10138/21279/mathemat.pdf?sequence=2'
citation: 'Your Name, You. (2015). &quot;Paper Title Number 3.&quot; <i>Journal 1</i>. 1(3).'
---
In cardiac myocytes (heart muscle cells), coupling of electric signal known as the action potential to contraction of the heart depends crucially on calcium-induced 
calcium release (CICR) in a microdomain known as the dyad. During CICR, the peak number of free calcium ions (Ca) present in the dyad is small, typically estimated 
to be within range 1-100. Since the free Ca ions mediate CICR, noise in Ca signaling due to the small number of free calcium ions influences Excitation-Contraction (EC) 
coupling gain. Noise in Ca signaling is only one noise type influencing cardiac myocytes, e.g., ion channels playing a central role in action potential propagation are stochastic 
machines, each of which gates more or less randomly, which produces gating noise present in membrane currents. How various noise sources influence macroscopic properties 
of a myocyte, how noise is attenuated and taken advantage of are largely open questions. In this thesis, the impact of noise on CICR, EC coupling and, more generally, 
macroscopic properties of a cardiac myocyte is investigated at multiple levels of detail using mathematical models. Complementarily to the investigation of the impact of 
noise on CICR, computationally-efficient yet spatially-detailed models of CICR are developed. The results of this thesis show that (1) gating noise due to the high-activity 
mode of L-type calcium channels playing a major role in CICR may induce early after-depolarizations associated with polymorphic tachycardia, which is a frequent precursor 
to sudden cardiac death in heart failure patients; (2) an inreased level of voltage noise typially inreases
ation potential duration and it skews distribution of ation potential durations toward long durations in ardia myoytes; 
and that (3) while a small 
number of Ca2+ ions mediate CICR, Exitation-Contration oupling is robust against this noise soure, partly due to the shape of ryanodine reeptor
protein strutures present in the ardia dyad.

[Download paper here](https://helda.helsinki.fi/bitstream/handle/10138/21279/mathemat.pdf?sequence=2)

Recommended citation: Tanskanen, Antti J. (2008). "Mathematical models on the impact of noise and dyadic molecular structures on the properties of a cardiac myocyte." 
<i>PhD thesis 1</i>. University of Helsinki.